https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/6526jy/fil_to_me_no_forgiveness_in_this_life_nor_the_next/

I wasn't going to share this here, but I will anyway. I took the night off work to attend my TBM MIL's 70th b-day party. My SIL was kinda shaken when it came up that I had left the church (over 1 year ago). That prompted my FIL to go off on me in front of a house full of people. He said things like how I would not have forgiveness in this life nor the next and how I wouldn't be able to baptize my kids when they're 8 and they'd have to grow up with no priesthood in the home. He also said he talked to my mom and that I had broken her heart. My SIL who started the conversation told him he was being unchristlike and unkind to me and that he's lucky I don't punch him in his mouth. I kept my cool. I told him I didn't appreciate being called out publicly and that it was pretty low of him to resort to fear tactics and manipulation. I told him the conversation was unfair because if I told my side it would create a huge riff in the family, but he's allowed to say whatever he wants. I wasn't about to unleash the messed up stuff with someone else's kids in the room. My TBM wife sat by my side until she had to leave to go cry in the next room. I did fine until he stood up and tried to get in my face where I was sitting. People were physically trying to stop him from approaching me. At that point, I stood up and left the house without saying a word. As I was walking out he continued to yell at me about how I knew what I was doing was wrong and that I served a mission and knew the church was true. All my nieces and nephews heard that part of the conversion....

Believe it or not, this is the ONLY run-in I've had with him. He is a very generous, loving and kind person....

https://www.reddit.com/r/exmormon/comments/67dpv6/lost_a_friend_today/?utm_content=title&utm_medium=new&utm_source=reddit&utm_name=multi

Saturday I had a friend who used to live in my ward come back and visit. Her and I used to be GREAT friends and still are to this day. She's always had a hard time fitting in everywhere she went, even though she was a gorgeous girl, and doesn't have very many friends. Saturday her and I went out to Sonic. I then laid down the truth to her that " I had quit the church and that I had left over church history" ... I never had any intentions of shelf-breaking but she asked me further about what I had problems with, so I simply stated "Joseph Smith Translation, Polygamy/Polyandry, and Brigham Young "revelation". Nothing more, nothing less. She then asks her father a little about it and he proceeds to call my father (Extremely TBM) and tell him that her and I can no longer be friends... After our visit she told me she had no harsh feelings towards me, respected me, and loved me, as did I tell her. Yet, she has one friend back where she lives now and her father just took away one of her friends down here. Sad, very sad. I've been about three months into this journey, I'll say today I admit, probably one of the worst days out of all of this, and I do admit a little defeat in my soul, but there are better ahead. I'd also like to take this time to say fuck Joseph Smith. Never said that before, feels liberating.
